guys this episode ended up getting
amazing
uh roughly we'll we'll put the time code
uh but we got onto an
absolutely fascinating topic and i'll be
heartbroken if you don't at least
watch that uh so this episode was rad i
promise you you will not regret it
you can go into the beginning where we
talk hardcore coveted stuff or you can
skip
right to the time code this is going to
be right there we'll put it i don't
remember where it was
roughly sort of halfway through the
episode um we got into
end of life and some really really
fascinating stuff so be sure to check
that out
hey everyone this episode is brought to
you by our sponsor betterhelp
an online counseling company with the
mission to make professional counseling
accessible affordable and convenient i
hope you enjoy
dr jennifer hey thank you so much for
joining me
um super excited to get this chance to
talk to you
thank you for having me i'm excited too
awesome so this is a pretty weird time
to be
in the medical field uh i see your
scrubs
hanging behind you are you are you more
at columbia university the school are
you more at the actual hospital
yeah so we have a medical center that's
associated with our university
uh columbia university medical center
and
uh that's where i had spent most of my
covet days
and is it still pretty hardcore is it
pretty hardcore covered there still
you know it's actually calmed down a bit
a lot i would say
you know it was pretty intense there for
a while i i had never seen anything like
it and frankly i didn't think that any
of my
mentors and older doctors that i you
know have worked with for so many years
had seen anything like it it was
really um it was pretty overwhelming
the entire hospital became i would say
probably close to 80 percent covered
uh lots of floors had to pop up and turn
into intensive care units to manage
these patients
and one day you know i walked around and
i suddenly saw that you know
every icu bed had two patients to a room
every operating room had four patients
in a room all on ventilators and it just
felt like the whole hospital was on a
ventilator and
everyone had the same exact disease
everyone had covered
and it was really it was bizarre it felt
almost like what i would think
war would feel like a bit you know where
you have your teams and you trust your
teams and
um you really depend on them to sort of
get you through
and support each other and it was it was
it was heavy
yeah i'm that that is uh something
everybody seemed to be super focused on
in the beginning i'd think that that
story would have resonated it would have
been like front
um page news somebody telling a story
like that
now i'm beginning to worry that either
because of summer
um or just like the the climate where
people have been pent up bad things are
happening to the economy obviously
what's gone on with the protesting
that people are so fed up with
so many things that now they're acting
like the virus
will give them a breather but you're
saying that
we're not seeing the sort of explosive
need of the hospital what do you think
is going on
is it that it's summer months it's
vitamin d it's sunlight it's people
being outdoors
is it that the lockdown was actually
effective is it that the virus is
mutating like what
what do you if you had to hazard a guess
and i know that right now it would be a
guess but
if you had to hazard a guess like why
are we um why are times getting better
i think it's probably a couple of
different things one i think that there
was
this latent period where we didn't know
the virus was spreading between people
and people were getting infected
and since we know that most people that
get coveted have pretty mild symptoms
and
you know aren't going to be that they
probably thought they had the flu or a
bad cold and so they were home spreading
and spreading
and then we reached this just sort of
massive
number of people infected and when you
get to that many infected people you're
going to see
a lot of people who need hospitalization
and so it reached this
sort of climax or pinnacle where
suddenly the hospitals just couldn't
manage it anymore but what's not gonna
happen is it's not gonna just disappear
and go away and it's not going away
because it's sunny out
and it's it's still there you know the
concern i think of people like fauci and
other infectious disease doctors is that
when we start being indoors more in
closed
spaces on the subways going back to work
reopening
that the spread is going to go up again
whether we'll ever
have that moment we had at least here in
new york city where
it was literally like you had to choose
who got a ventilator and who didn't
and thousands of people dying every day
my hope is that that doesn't happen
again
but that we will have to deal with kovid
for the next year
chronically coming into our hospital and
trying to minimize spread within the
hospital which i think we're doing a
really good job
and if this becomes something that we
see every year like a flu
um how gnarly is this gonna be like
right now man i treat this [__] like it
is panic central i don't let um
people in my house i am washing or
wiping down on my groceries it is a
nightmare like and i know everybody's
going through this but like what a pain
in the ass
to one i don't even want to go to the
grocery store right so i'm getting
everything delivered which miracle of
miracles that we live in a time where
that's possible
but i don't even want like um to go back
to the office
even though like we have a cleaner that
could come in and like be
wiping all the surfaces and stuff but it
just seems like man
anything that i can avoid i want to
which was fine when i thought this was
like
a month or two months but living with
that like elevated level of paranoia i'm
actually one not sure humans are capable
of that i think we will end up letting
our guard down
i i'm already i can feel myself getting
a little bit lacks at the edges
um so what does this look like if it's
really ongoing it's just here cyclically
every year
well i think the the hope is that
you know viruses that spread the best
and stay the best are generally not
going to be
viruses that kill you quickly because
like ebola if you're going to have a 50
you know death rate or mortality the
virus won't even be able to get to the
next person but
you know to find a new host so things
like influenza
all other coronaviruses like the common
cold those things are mild and so you
keep it to me i give it to you every
time
nobody cares and it just kind of spreads
around and people get sick and they get
better
if this virus wants to stick around
it may mutate into a less virulent form
which is usually what we see over time
the other potential is vaccination now
whether vaccination will
say you don't get it is unlikely it's
probably going to be more like a flu
vaccine
scenario where you get something and you
get a milder version or you don't get
quite as sick
and then that will also allow people to
come out and to us to have
you know some kind of hurt immunity to
this which is really the goal
um but to achieve herd immunity before
that
would require millions of people to die
so we're buying our time letting people
get infected i mean people are still
getting infected we're still treating
them it's just that
at least the hospitals can manage the
intake i want to reassure people and
that
really the people who die of covid for
the most part
we've seen are in a much older age
bracket or with a lot of other medical
conditions
that doesn't mean i haven't seen people
in their 30s with no nothing wrong with
them so yes you're
right to think oh my god what if i get
coveted i'm screwed i could die
like any of us could die but you could
also get h1n1 flu and die
so there is like this loss of memory
that we forget that like you could die
of the flu too
as a young healthy person it does happen
it's not common
i think probably covet is worse than the
regular flu but
it does happen i got the flu in
january and it was so gnarly
that by the end of it i was like oh my
god like
this really can kill people i was like
this [__] was real
i i've never had something linger that
long like i always think of being sick
as a seven day commitment
and so at day ten to have still been
like yo i just cannot get out of bed
this is crazy
and i had been lulled but the common
cold the sort of average flu had lulled
me into the sense of you get sick you
get better
and that it was a foregone conclusion
that you get better and then when it
just wasn't going away wasn't going away
wasn't going away
and i was coughing so much i was like
man i must be doing damage to
my lung tissue like you can't cough like
this and not have
some scarring or something and that
actually
brings me back to covid so one of the
things that made me so interested in
talking to you because you're an expert
in the heart
is what is happening at the heart level
like
does the normal flu do damage to the
kind of tissues that we see kova doing
or is this something totally different
so that's a really good question so the
flu can actually
cause a cardiomyopathy which is an
enlarged heart it can cause a
myocarditis
so it but rare you know these are rare
instances but viruses causing damage to
different parts of the body is nothing
new you know we've seen it what's really
interesting about covid
or coronavirus stars 2 seems to have a
really interesting
effect on the vasculature so the blood
vessels
that are sometimes microscopic in size
in your lungs in your brain
in your skin in your heart in your
kidneys and that's why we're seeing
this multi-organ systemic involvement in
people
often who get really sick so we're
seeing strokes
uh heart attack picture myocarditis
inflammation arrhythmias
enlarged hearts we're seeing kidneys
that fail
and then eventually recover um we're
seeing
terrible skin rashes we're seeing a
kawasaki like syndrome in children which
is a
vasculature disorder so i keep saying to
my friends you know covet is sort of
like a contagious vasculitis and a
vasculitis is an inflammation of the
blood vessels and usually it's more of
an autoimmune process but there's
something about it that feels like a
contagious vasculitis like
you can catch it the way you catch a
cold yeah that
that makes this a lot scarier to me if
um
if i think about in terms of even people
that aren't showing symptoms and and i'd
love to know if this is actually true
but i heard that even people that don't
show symptoms if you were to x-ray the
lungs or look at the heart you actually
do see tissue damage
and that is where this starts to get
really scary because you want to think
well
i i didn't show symptoms i'm young i'm
strong whatever
and so i'm fine but then you actually
look at a tissue level it's like no
you're not fine
and every insult and this is where
you know what a weird balance have to
it's like we're walking this razor's
edge of protecting people from a health
perspective but also not letting the
economy
just absolutely implode we've already
seen sort of how
much of a powder keg that can make
things um but
it's like if somebody else gets me sick
and
even if i don't show symptoms and in
their mind they're being sort of
flipping about it well i'm not around
anybody who's old or whatever you know
with underlying
young i'll be fine right but that
they're sort of edging me closer to the
grave because even if i was
able to overcome it now but it just it
just
chipped away at something you know what
i mean that's where um
i get super nervous are there one i'd
love to know like
how profoundly are we talking the
average person i get it there's people
that sort of at the high end just
devastating the opposite i need a heart
transplant whatever
um and then there's people who it's
super super minor but like if you had to
sort of pick a median
uh 50 fall below 50 fall above roughly
where we at
i think that i mean okay i'm seeing the
worst of the worst
and i'm also seeing in my icu the people
who make it to the icu
and who we're gonna try to really save
as opposed to a 90 year old
who says i don't want a breathing tube
right so i'm i'm self-selected to see a
very specific group in the intensive
care unit
so i'm which are sort of younger and
possibly
you know the ability to make it through
i i while i realize that
there may be long-term abnormalities
that we're seeing in the tissue of
people with more mild or moderate
disease
i feel hopeful because it seems like the
majority of people who recover
are okay and that there is a fraction i
would say
you know maybe it's 10 15 20
who have some kind of ongoing issue
whether it's
you know they have a little like you
said if you get a cat scan their lungs
might have scarring that doesn't
necessarily mean that they are
not okay they may have scar i mean we
have people who have long scarring who
can go run a marathon you know that's
not the end of your life
i mean even the people who had foaming
and heart failure i've seen recover
so it's still a work in progress to
understand i think that people who've
had it and recovered and feel okay
shouldn't be worried but we don't have
any long-term data we don't know for
sure what happens to people
two years after covet and that's the
scary part and do you have a hypothesis
like do you so if you were going to
this is what i always tell people to do
in business right so you
you have information so you're obviously
very informed about the heart so your
whatever hypothesis you're going to form
is
what i call an informed hypothesis then
you've also been dealing with covid so
more information there
obviously all of it is incomplete but
you've got enough information i'd say
you'd be able to build an informed
hypothesis
and so what do you think is happening
biologically why is this virus
weakening the vasculature for instance
and then coming out of it
um what can people do to
improve themselves right well first of
all the best thing you can do
for yourself is to be as healthy as
possible going into any of these things
so we know for a fact based on data that
people with obesity
diabetes hypertension underlying heart
problems
they're at higher risk so we already
know off the bat there so if this if
you've been in quarantine for three
months and you're gonna be
home this is the time to eat healthy get
in shape get your risk factors under
control
i mean it's pretty straightforward you
know you want to be a healthy person
you can't control your age your age is
what your age is but i try to reassure
people that are younger that it's
you know you're probably gonna be fine
it's it's okay but if you get it
you have to take it seriously another
issue is i think that in many instances
there were so many people that got sick
at once and
their access to care was delayed and
if you are not feeling well you know
instead of having that mentality like i
don't want to go to the hospital
everyone there has covered
go to the hospital and get treatment you
know and i think that
that's going to really um help a lot of
recovery
is earlier access to treatment instead
of delayed and waiting and also people
didn't know right they didn't really
know they had coven
what is the treatment now if i were to
come in and say man i really think that
uh this could be coveted you test me it
is um what
what's the protocol i don't need a
ventilator let's say so we're we're
okay so let's say your oxygen's a little
low and you're coughing a lot so we
would give you
oxygen now there's a lot of data on
steroids there was a big
study that came out about dexamethasone
i mean steroids have been around forever
and they they basically prevent an
overwhelming immune response right so
there's there's a cytokine storm
is that what you're right so the hope is
that we'll decrease inflammation
decrease the cytokine storm for whatever
reason
coronavirus affects the blood vessels
walls and the cells and kind of causes
them to
pull apart and then leak and when they
leak like that we call you know
capillary leak the fluid extravasates
into the space around so you get fluid
in your lungs you get
compromised tissue in the heart in the
kidney and so steroids in some manner
may or may not prevent that
you know we use steroids to uh fight
normal vasculitis or inflammatory
disorders autoimmune diseases to
suppress your own natural immune system
and immune response
so that's you know the theory behind
that um
you know it's going to be supportive
care but i think the important thing
about supportive care like giving you
some steroids possibly or giving you
remdesseviere which is an antiviral or
giving you oxygen
those are supportive treatments right
none of those things are curing you from
coronavirus
so we want to support you as much as we
can we and the issue is we don't want to
let you
languish and let your oxygenation get
worse and you spiral into this
worsening respiratory status and that
can happen if you're just sitting at
home
i mean my parents asked me like what
should we buy and i said the best thing
i think you should buy is like a pulse
oximeter which are those little things
you stick on your finger and they tell
you what your oxygen is
because you might have an oxygen of
saturation of 90
and not even know it uh you might not
even feel that short of breath
and then by the time you get to the
hospital you're at 70 and they're
putting
you on a breathing tube so early
intervention is better
so going back to
getting your underlying health
conditions in order what can people do
to improve themselves yeah i mean i
think that if you start to
look at who's at risk and you can look
at something like high blood pressure
you know like high blood pressure is a
vascular disorder
it is a disorder of the blood vessels
and the arterials throughout your body
and what is it about that abnormality
that predisposes you to increase
severity or increased risk of getting
this
virus is it that your risk of getting
the virus is the same as everybody
else's
but that the effect on your blood
vessels will be different you know
probably
um is it that you know the medications
you're taking
for your high blood pressure have some
interaction
you know we don't know and what about
obesity you know also a disorder where
your vasculature may be compromised
because
you know you have uh low exercise you
don't work out your heart
is not a you know in great shape i mean
there's a million
interplays and i don't think it's going
to be one simple path i don't think it's
going to be
this causes this causes this i think you
know we see that
some people get this overwhelming
cytokine response and
their lungs are completely filled with
fluid i mean white out on the cat scan
with covet and
i've seen an 80 year old lady come in
and barely be sick and go home you know
it's like
why you know you know that's the million
dollar question is why in one
is it so different from another and like
all viruses though i will say
you know there is a tolerance right the
reason why you know the spanish flu was
so bad was that it was a variant we
hadn't seen and nobody had any immunity
like once we build up our own immune
system's ability to fight this
we'll be better off the question is how
do you do that in advance as sort of
preventative and
like i said the best we can offer is you
know
vitamin d maybe take some zinc although
we don't know if that's for sure you
know
exercise run take good care of yourself
eat healthy foods
but those are all recommendations we
give for people's heart anyway yeah i
was gonna say and that's
i think part of um what i am really
excited to see
people actually get the information
around because what i hear
in terms of what people should do for
covid is just what you should do
period like if the the overlap between
do this for longevity and do this for
kovid
border on 100 i totally and so
that's why i'm trying to like even even
when you
look at um obesity diabetes
heart disease um stroke alzheimer's it's
they they all start swirling around
diet quite frankly diet exercise
certainly to an extent but if you were
to
press me to say okay you can only
influence one diet or exercise
i wouldn't go to diet faster i would go
to diet like
a thousand fold over exercise exercise
is rad
but at least in bodybuilding i always
used to say you can't out you can't
outrun a bad diet so no matter how much
cardio you're doing
at the end of the day you're still doing
some level of damage from what you're
eating
um so that's why like just trying to
understand like at a cellular level
where
the breakdown is what's going on like
i'm intrigued by vitamin d that's been
the thing through
this that i've been obsessive about so
i'm very grateful that i live in los
angeles right about now
but i'm curious like as you look at the
research that's coming out are people
beginning to understand what's happening
at a cellular level or are we still just
flying blind i mean i think there is
research coming out where they're trying
to understand you know
what kind of antibodies are made against
covaid what we're trying to tell us
actually no right so if you look at the
plasma
of people who have had coronavirus
and you look at the kinds of antibodies
they have and then you test those
antibodies against
uh receptors that we know exist on the
covid virus
we're they're finding that there are
certain antibodies that completely
eliminate the ability of covid to you
know enter
other cells so you know you think about
a virus a virus comes in it takes over
your cell
it becomes like a hijacker and it makes
that cell produce
all this virus particle and then it
spews it all out and then more viruses
cruise around and
invade another uh cell and take over
that cell and produce tons of virus
particles and then the circulating virus
itself then causes damage to all your
body parts
so if you get a vaccine or that has an
antibody
or you know antibody therapy for covid
you're going to want to give
someone antibodies that literally you
know
block the receptor they spit the cell
expresses it
sits out on the front of the cell the
coronavirus comes along with its
receptor
and it's blocked can't get in because
this antibody won't let it get in
so you know this is the kind of things
that we are looking at when we
uh try to understand how to stop it i
want to go back to something you said
earlier you talked about the 90 year old
patient that shows up and has a do not
resuscitate
being a physician at your level and your
expertise i'm sure puts you in touch
with death a lot
super curious to know how you think
about end of life
i feel like i may have some not widely
held beliefs about end of life i
i think that god this is going to sound
weird um i think that people may
cling to being alive
to a point that doesn't make sense and
from the outside when you're watching it
at the end and there is no joy to be had
um i someone that i cared about i
watched them
die it was so gnarly and they were sort
of in and out of consciousness
and they at the at the very end
i actually i couldn't understand what
they were fighting for and it was one
because it was it was a one-way street
it was cancer like there was just
nothing
right it was the end it was the end and
um
i so respected his mentality like he had
this shirt that he wore all the time
that said can't stop won't stop
and i was like [__] yeah man i respect
that like that's rad that is a great way
to live
but if i'm honest and i were in his
situation i
there is a point at which you go this is
this is a fight i can't win it's not
like i can get to the other side of this
and there's quality of life
so now it's like existing just for the
sake of existing
whereas i personally would rather um tap
out a little earlier
yeah in a way that's a lot more peaceful
um
and i'm curious like how you see
different people dealing with that
do we deal with it the same here that
people deal with it elsewhere um
you know what are your thoughts on that
death is such an interesting topic i
mean i think
the way you perceive death changes as
you age
right and as you grow older and as you
experience death in your own life i
think that our culture has a very
strange relationship to death
in the united states compared to some
other cultures and how
there is this like you just pointed out
this sort of relentless
like i want everything done i want
everything done i can't tell you how
many
people where i'm like what are you doing
like this is actually
like almost torture like where we've had
to call ethics consults because the
doctors feel uncomfortable
prolonging life that the family wants
prolonged and
yeah do we have machines that can do
these things and your loved one is alive
but they're not alive
you know they're on 10 different
machines and as soon as you turn one of
them off they're dead you know so
i mean a lot of places especially you
know countries that have socialized
medicine
they don't spend money like that at the
end of life they will
or they won't offer things like we don't
have the resources to offer dialysis
here
this is a feudal treatment to offer
dialysis um and so i think it's
in part the health care um like
industry's fault and because we're like
we can offer this and we can try this
and let's try that and then
and then part of it is the mentality
like
i have i have the right to choose all
these things for my loved one and i tell
my patients sometimes when i'm doing end
of life i say
you know you're not deciding whether
your loved one lives or dies
your loved one is gonna die regardless
of what you decide here
we're all gonna die and they're gonna
die sooner the question is how do you
want that death to be
do you want it to be calm and peaceful
or do you want to continue
and i and sometimes it's a process it
takes people a few days
weeks to kind of come around to
understand it but
you know there are countries where you
know people take their loved ones home
and die in the home and it's not scary
and it's not
you know horrible and they can even keep
the body there and have like a
night or two with the body i mean people
do things totally differently in other
cultures
and one of my mentors was always like
not everyone has to die in the intensive
care unit and it's so true
like there's a time when it's enough but
i mean to your point like
the mentality of fighting you know i
think it's so hard
when i was younger and i was in training
and i would see people die i think i
would have this very unemotional
reaction as a resident because you would
like
run to these codes and and people would
live or die or
from you know see so many people die and
it felt very like robotic like oh my god
now as i got older and i'm like
hopefully not gonna die soon but like
you start to think about it more
and when i feel like now when i see
death more in the hospital especially
with the
with covet i think like wow like that's
it
like that person is done and like that's
a different
it feels different to me now like it
feels more profound but also like we
don't always have to do everything
like i feel very much about you know
helping families try to get through
the dying process in a way that's more
manageable and i think we really it's
starting to change like there's a whole
new
workforce of palliative care doctors and
hospice trying to
make death better but i get you know
death's scary because we don't know what
happens
we don't know if that's this interesting
i'm i'm not tripped out
at all by not no no no
i'm tripped out by death to the point
where i want to live forever and i mean
that
quite literally um even though i think
there are huge
issues if people were to live forever i
think that that might actually be wildly
problematic but nonetheless selfishly
i'm an [__] i want it for myself
uh and you didn't get bored you wouldn't
feel like no no
there's a book you must read it's called
einstein's dreams and it's this whole
like short stories around um
time and one of them is what if
everybody lived forever
and the hypothesis of that story which
resonated with me so much i think about
it all the time
is the world would bifurcate into two
types of people people that did nothing
because there's always
time to do it tomorrow and then people
who did everything because they could
actually get good at
everything they ever wanted to get good
at and i thought oh my god i fall into
that camp i'm so aggressive and this is
why death freaks me out
it's like i am constantly running this
thought experiment of like yo my time is
finite
i can only spend it in so many different
ways and
that bothers me to a level i don't know
how to articulate
the mere fact that the things that i
find interesting and fascinating that
juice me up
i can't do them all and that causes like
this
deep sense of unease i can't even let
myself think about it so
it's i always tell people if you want to
be successful in life you're like
you won't have time like you won't have
time to learn spanish like you won't
have time
to like that kind of stuff 100
so i while i
have built my life and my psychology
around
learning and that's it not knowing not
being
i get rewarded all the time for
being something and i try like not to
think about it but i know
that like i have to work so hard to want
to reinvent myself to want to learn
where i'm wrong
it's very very hard and so even i worry
because i can feel as i get older
something is changing i won't say
whether it's better or worse i can just
feel that i
am changing and so you age as i age 100
and part of the reason i think people
are obsessed with kids is
they're just so doe-eyed like they're
optimistic about everything
and then over time you get all these
weird things that reside on a layer of
your subconscious
that is hard to access and the
my wife has put it perfectly and
she has really encouraged me to
focus on this because she says you've
hardened over time
and i used to be very playful and so now
i try to like bring that back i try to
embody that playfulness i try to really
take time to be playful
but when i think about that
without conscious thought it happened it
goes back to what we were saying about
the virus it's like
the virus just ah the one time you got
sick man no big deal you got better but
it did
sort of take some number of days off
your life and you just
enough of those enough of those enough
of those and it's all sort of
accumulating
in your subconscious and so you have to
fight against that so anyway
back to death and end of life which i am
i am beyond obsessed with this whole
idea this whole notion
um so palliative care and where
that's going i am really intrigued i
would love to know
the people that you're seeing work in
this space
how do we make death better what does
that mean
so what i've learned from them because
they're really the experts
is when we go to talk to people they say
to that they ask them questions
like assuming that the person can still
communicate but they'll they ask
questions like
what is what brings meaning to your life
right now
what do you enjoy how would you want to
die
how would you want your family to be
around you when you die
is there anything that's bringing you
meaning to life
to your life now while you're in the
hospital that makes you want to be alive
you know like really trying to
understand the patient because i think
we project
so much of our feelings about death onto
the person
and we don't allow them to express
themselves because like they're the ones
dying
you know so there's that out aspect of
it then there's
and then people are caught i mean not
everyone's simple some people are in
denial some people are very angry
you know some people different reactions
have you seen i'm super curious
i've seen i mean look i think that there
are certain patients that are very much
like
i've lived a good life i'm ready like
i'm good and and it's not always that
they
have accomplished some incredible things
i mean sometimes they're just
regular people their grandparents they
have loving families they have loving
kids
um sometimes they've been through a lot
and they're done
so they get to a point where they're
like i'm not doing this anymore like
it's over meaning their
their actual breakdown of their body has
been brutal
yes like i think that they've been
through let's say heart transplant and
re-transplant or they've gotten a
mechanical pump and they're
that pump isn't working or they've been
waiting for transplant for lungs for a
long time and they're not the lungs
aren't coming and
you know i think that the the the stages
of dying is
or are grieving you know kind of applies
to all things
that sort of you know anger denial
acceptance you know there's all those
stages and i and i think they're real
like you see depression and then
recovery you see
you see people go through it and i think
the family reactions are interesting
i find that there's there's some
families that are like whatever they
want
we just want her to be comfortable you
know then there's these divided families
where you can see that there's a lot of
conflict
in the family itself and who feels like
they should make the decision
and who feels like they shouldn't and
does that
happen when the person is still
conscious
or is that breakdown only when the
person can't really
i have seen the person who's dying be
very disengaged from the conversation
and
uh one family member's pushing a lot and
um it's not that they fight if they
fought back it would be different these
are more people who are
not speaking much that are very i don't
want to use the word catatonic but very
withdrawn
um don't have you know don't feel like
engaging much in discussion because
they're
maybe depressed or exhausted um and that
or they sort of have a relationship
dynamic with their spouse or their
partner or whoever their child
where that person makes their decisions
for them and tends to go the craziest
you must like thin slice the life out of
people they walk in you like oh that
person's gonna be a problem
no but you know it is funny i feel like
there are some people who in the
beginning are very angry
and they're angry that their loved one
has had a lot of complications
and sometimes complications happen
and and those people are challenged and
they don't trust
the health care system or they haven't
they've had experience with someone else
and they don't trust the health care
system they think we're trying to kill
off their loved one i find it's often
more painful when people are younger
and it's it's not all bad you know
sometimes it's very moving and you see
you know families want to do the best
for their loved one they we
help them through a process like we meet
with them on monday and we talk about
what may or may not happen and let's
regroup in four days and then four days
you regroup and you discuss
this isn't happening it's not getting
better and people come to terms over
time but i think the reason it takes so
long besides the death is inherently
hard to accept
that your loved one is dying is that we
come from a culture where people
think well maybe if i transfer them to
another hospital they'll be able to save
them and it's like science does
medicine doesn't keep you alive forever
you know there are some conditions that
you just can't treat and sometimes
they're complicated and hard to explain
and that's hard for people to understand
especially when they don't have any
science background
tell me tell me more about the um taking
the body home or taking the person home
they pass away at home
and then spending time with the body um
so i actually read this really
interesting
article about this where i think that
there's a story that this happened
in in this country with a man i don't
remember if he was in seattle where his
wife
died she had had a long battle and they
kept her body uh in the home in bed
for you know family to come for her
children to be around
and sort of accept the time where you go
through and realize that
like they're not in that body anymore
whatever your religious or spiritual
beliefs are
a dead person is very different from
that personal life i don't know if
you've seen a dead person
with your own eyes or seen someone you
knew die and looked at them and awake
but like there is something very
different about someone who's dead
and that experience of seeing like okay
well they're not
that it's not like my loved one joe or
whoever mary is there but it's like
they're gone
i had i i've i've been to several
funerals where
um somebody that i cared about had
passed away
um most of that that was when i was
growing up so
my grandparents i was around four or
three of them
dying um and then i recently had a
former employee who i
really cared about um pass away and
went to his funeral and all of that was
heartbreaking um but
were it not for another experience what
i which i will say in a second i
wouldn't understand what you're saying
right now
but when my dog died who was the first
dog that my wife and i had so we don't
have kids
and i was traveling when he died
and but like i was on the flight home
literally
i was um texting back and forth with my
wife she was at the vet
and it was just all happening so fast
and so when i landed i went straight to
um the vet and
i needed to see his body it was so weird
and yeah literally up until that moment
i thought i i always tell people if uh
if you can predict something it
shouldn't be upsetting
so i was like look my parents are gonna
die i get it and i really felt detached
from it like
i've loved them i'm so connected to them
now i've
i've run the thought experiment so i'm
not like putting it off this
i'm never going to be like oh my god
they're mortal like
that's so like 100 and so
that way when it happens i will be
absolutely crestfallen but
i won't be like oh my god i see it
coming and why didn't i call more
like i won't be there right but when my
dog died i realized that's all [__]
i will only have an emotional response i
will be overwhelmed
i'll i'll be beating my chest and
wailing it's like such a
it was this weird deep-seated need to
to see his body to know that he wasn't
there anymore
it was so weird it it even now
i can understand it in that i went
through it so i know what it
feels like from the inside but it's like
hard to recapture that sense
when you're sort of emotionally sober
and on the outside of it
i mean i think that what one thing that
i'm taking also from what you're saying
is how
differently we can feel about things at
different times
and then think about how we felt at that
time but not necessarily be able to feel
that same way again
like or you think about someone who's
very depressed and they have this
feeling like
you know saying things like what does it
matter we're all gonna die anyway
and like that sort of very fatalistic
feeling that come like they that they
sort of can see
the truth that we're all missing right
i've heard had people describe it to me
like that like i can
you know you don't understand but you
know
like there's just no point in living
because we're all going to die who cares
if you win this award or you
probably run that marathon you're just
dead in the end anyway and then when
you're not depressed
all of that goes away and like you don't
see the world that way
you can't even relate to having that
thought because you're
preoccupied with training for the race
and going to work and doing your job
and seeing your kids because it doesn't
like enter your brain space
and it's the same of i think about grief
in some ways it's like
it can be so overwhelming and yet
somehow you move past it so that you're
not
in that intense moment forever right and
um but we don't talk about death and
dying
at all we don't talk about it to our
kids i mean like did your parents ever
have a real discussion with you about
dying like what do you think happens
when you die
where do you go do you think there's
anything you know
no and that's really interesting i have
quite
my parents i never got like an official
birds and bees talk
i never got an official death and dying
talk like when my
grandparents died um
i'm sure like knowing my mom i'm sure
she was like hey if you need to express
your emotion express it like she would
have been super super supportive
but there was never like a this is what
death means or this is how to process it
or anything like that right um and you
think that you're
you know what your parents want to have
done if they were sick have they told
you
have you had that conversation we my so
my sister is the keeper of that
information so
yes but i think it is my dad definitely
does not want to be
resuscitated i'm not sure about my
mom i mean i think the other thing
that's hard for people is like what does
that
mean like of course you would want to be
resuscitated from something that you
could survive
right so like if you're need cpr because
you have a heart attack
and if someone does cpr and you are
recovered from that
you'll be okay then i want cpr but if
i'm like have end stage cancer
and you try to resuscitate me for what
so that i can
diet two days later that's a different
kind of cpr so that's like another thing
that
needs to be talked about but it's i
don't know i just get i i feel like in
in cultures in the in you know the east
death can take on a different meaning
you know this idea that like we don't
spend any time with a dead body i get it
kind of like it's dead it's creepy body
but also like
is that normal like maybe it's normal to
be with the dead body and to process the
death of your loved one
i don't know i don't know what i would
want i don't know if i would walk but i
probably wouldn't want a
dead body in my house for that long
because it would be upsetting
but that's because i've been raised to
think that i'm super freaked out with
anyone other than my wife
i'd be like i would have my moment 100 i
would spend you know
20 30 minutes like like it's you know
it's rough and and embodying that sense
of loss
um was very cathartic with my dog and i
i know that people will think that
that's sort of weird but for me that was
actually a very very meaningful moment
um so
it was wildly cathartic so i would
definitely take that time but with my
wife
dude is taxidermy out like i am so
attached to my wife that it's like to
anything like what can i do to hold on
to that i worry that i would turn into
that psychopath that like
you know her withered corpse is like in
a chair in another room
and you know i just i i can't let it go
so uh
i i probably need to do some thinking on
that to not end up in a weird place but
uh yeah well i think coronavirus
has made everyone think about death a
little bit
because their fake they've lost people
you know they've lost grandparents
they've lost parents
um and then there's there was this
incredible fear of death
you know that i think was so part of the
quarantine
was this fear of unnatural early death
for everybody in in a thing that we
couldn't control and didn't understand
and i think that that was scary and i
think that people are a little
traumatized from that
and so i think this discussion of death
is um
not so untimely just because i think
it's something you know
i think that's been on people's minds
yeah
i think uh i think talking through it
and figuring out what people want for
themselves is also going to be really
powerful
i know a lot of doctors have do not
resuscitate where do you fall on the
issue what's your
what's your guidance i mean i think i
would want to be resuscitated
like we just discussed like as long as i
can go home and spend meaningful time
with things that i do that i like if i
was in
terrible pain that couldn't be changed
or i had no meaning in my life
anymore because i couldn't actually
engage with the people i love
then i would probably be fine with dnr
but like if i
had a catastrophic event and was in the
hospital on a breathing tube you know
out of it
i would want my family to to stop care i
would not want them to keep me alive you
know in a vegetative state in some
nursing home for what's the point of
that i mean there's all kinds of
extremes
i think most people fall in the middle
somewhere but
they come to the middle in different
ways you know and
um there's always going to be the really
extreme like i refuse to let my person
die you know or
you know the opposite extreme where
people kind of seem like they don't care
but uh you almost want them to be more
involved in the care of their family
member
that's less often but i think for the
most part people are in the middle i
just think it's
it's hard you know i think that it's
hard and i think that
coronavirus has made everybody really
afraid
and so those things together you know
are hard and then when you on top of it
you make it so that we can't have their
loved ones come in
to talk about dying you know and then
two weeks after that happens
you know there's protests with thousands
of people on the street and
joe schmoe is saying you know why
couldn't i come in and say goodbye to my
wife of 70 years
but these people are allowed to protest
oh my god
we get that i would lose my mind right
and i
i've had really angry families say this
is typical
hypocrisy like how can you tell us this
when other people are allowed to be out
and we kind of had to stay on the line
and just say i mean i think actually we
just are opening up our visitation
policy like tomorrow or something but we
had for so long we had to stay on the
line because we were trying to protect
other people in the hospital other
people that didn't have covet in the
hospital
you know prevent transmission i mean
you're walking into a place where the
whole place has covered
you know there was concerns that anybody
who came in could get it very easily
especially if they're at the bedside
yeah i would lose my mind like speaking
of um
by the way i'm in no way saying that the
protest shouldn't happen
i just i don't know jesus i hope nobody
would confuse that but it is
it is blatantly a double standard
whether it's a warranted double standard
or not is a whole other
question but you can imagine like just
thinking about losing my wife
like when you've shared 70 years with
somebody
and this is that moment where they go
like [__] there is no more
like that that is sort of that last yeah
they want to hold their hand and then
you turn around and walk down the street
and there's 10 000 people on the street
it
feels painful yeah i can see people
really losing their mind without in any
way shape or form diminishing
the power of the protest it's like i
would lose my mind
yeah right jennifer thank you so much
for joining me dude this was so much fun
like where can people
find you um if they want to connect
yeah i'm on twitter at dr jen haith uh
j-e-n-n-h-a-y-t-h-e and my instagram is
the same
dr jen heath amazing well thank you
again for joining me this was wonderful
i really
really enjoyed that conversation it's
fantastic that was fun take care
okay you got it all right everybody
subscribe and until next time my friends
be legendary take care
hey everybody it's time to talk about
mental health
as a lot of you know i suffered from
anxiety for
years and trying to tackle something
like that on your own
is not always the best so if any of you
are feeling lost or hopeless or have
anxiety
or tremendous fear or feel like maybe
you're sliding towards depression
getting help is a critical part of
getting better
but a lot of people are nervous to even
try out therapy or don't really know
where to start
well now there is a service called
better help that makes therapy more
accessible and affordable so
you can get a counselor with the sort of
expertise that might not be available to
you locally
betterhelp assesses your needs and
matches you with a licensed
professional therapist within 24 hours
you can log into your account anytime to
message your counselor
and betterhelp also has group in our
sessions every week where members can
learn in groups
directly from licensed counselors on
multiple topics like relationships and
ways to overcome your anxiety
especially if the thought of seeking
help makes you even a little nervous
be sure to check out over 60 000
positive reviews posted on the
betterhelp site
that's help as an h-e-l-p
betterhelp is committed to making it
easy for you to access the therapeutic
help you need
even if you've never gone to counseling
before it's free to switch therapists
it's more affordable than local therapy
and they even have financial aid
available
betterhelp wants you to start living a
happier life
today visit betterhelp.com
forward slash h t again that's
better help help us spell h e l p
forward slash h t and join over
500 000 people taking charge of their
mental health
with the help of an experienced
professional better help is professional
counseling
done securely online using your computer
tablet or mobile phone
through video calls phone calls or text
messaging
with licensed therapists who are
certified by their state's board to
provide
therapy and counseling it is not
self-help
and it's not a crisis line it's an
online service available worldwide and
it has a
massive network of counselors who have a
broad and diverse range of specialties
better help costs just 65 dollars per
week and financial aid is available for
those who qualify
during the sign up process as a viewer
of health theory you can get 10 percent
off your first month
so visit betterhelp.com forward slash
ht and get the help you need today all
right guys take care and be
legendary thank you guys so
much for watching and being a part of
this community if you haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit
and unlocking your full potential